---
layout: post
title: "independent web-making: an experiment"
---

Before I started this website, I took some time to learn about the options out there for anyone who wants to publish their own content online. While I don’t want to get into the super technical aspects of web hosting here, I’d like to give a rundown on how I decided on what *not* to use for my own blog and why that matters to the themes I’d like to explore in the future.  

To clarify, I’m not against resorting to corporate services online, since for now that’s the economic reality [we’re faced with](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/feb/17/almost-impossible-to-function-without-big-five-tech-giants). However, for a blog that investigates what it means to build upon anti-capitalist (pro-community cooperation, pro-publics, pro-egalitarian) logic, I was curious about how far I could go to apply these values to my own site’s architecture, as well as explore what it means to distribute my content ‘autonomously’ with as little dependency on external for-profit services as possible. I’ve been inspired by DIY zine & punk culture for years, so the question of whether there could be an online parallel to self-publishing with just a run-down printer and some staples was something I wanted to look more into.

For most people, starting a Wordpress.com site is the simplest free option, as far as getting a blog up and running goes. (Wordpress.*org* is actually a different thing and there’s lots of information on what those differences are).

The main distinction is that the former is a private hosting service (like Squarespace) while the latter is an open-source content management system that lets you run your website yourself (or at least modify the Wordpress software and have 100% control over your content). In this sense, I definitely prefer Wordpress.org. The thing about Wordpress is that I would still have to buy both a domain name and web-hosting for server space.

 Another popular route I looked into was bypassing running your own site altogether and using a platform publisher like Medium, which structures itself like a really big magazine, but without a traditional masthead or overarching journalistic and literary purpose. Medium also hosts smaller publications (which are not independent per se, but run on the Medium platform, such as Roxane Gay’s [“Unruly Bodies"](https://gay.medium.com/unruly-bodies/home).

Although it’s admirable that Medium now has schemes for paying its writers, I have often felt uncomfortable with how similar its interface feels to traditional social media websites, which often depend on a lack of algorithmic transparency and tend to over-value more ‘viral’ content based on likes and views (classic “attention economy” kind of stuff). And as far as the journalism industry goes, Medium appears to have an [economic transparency problem](http://studyhall.xyz/blog/2018/6/12/mediums-mess-the-rise-and-fall-of-the-site-that-was-supposed-to-save-journalism), as discussed in a blog post published by the media workers support network, Study Hall.

In the end, I decided to use a static site generator called [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) and push my content (made up primarily of text files) through GitHub Pages. Part of this decision was informed by a [Digital Humanities working group on “minimal computing”]( https://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/about/) which is a concept that “refers to computing done under some set of significant constraints of hardware, software, education, network capacity, power, or other factors.” Further, minimal computing is described as a “critical movement, akin to environmentalism, asking for balance between gains and costs in related areas that include social justice issues and de-manufacturing and reuse.”

Although this particular concept appears to be aimed at an academic audience who form part of the same field of study, minimal computing is an idea I feel could be applied to broader everyday attempts to claim agency in an online environment increasingly shaped by the interests of Big Tech. For me, this means things like having a better understanding of (and thus more control over) how my content actually gets published from my offline desktop to the web, as well as feeling like I could share my website with someone else on a USB stick even if I ran out of money to maintain a Squarespace subscription. It’s hard to imagine what the internet would be like without the imposing architecture of Amazon, Google, Facebook, Apple, or Microsoft, but I think it’s increasingly valuable to build alternatives for ourselves.

Although getting the hang of Jekyll (and GitHub) requires some initial effort (such as learning to overcome a culturally-conditioned resistance to using the command line), I feel it’s been worth the energy. I now have a bundle of lightweight files that make up my site which I can edit completely on my own without need for a third-party interface. I also only had to pay for a domain name, but I could have easily used the GitHub pages domain instead. I should note, though, that GitHub is now owned by Microsoft as of June 2018, which perhaps complicates my initial goal of not having to rely on one of the Big Tech for-profit corporate services. Overall, though, the process of maintaining my website with just a text-editor feels considerably more freeing than posting directly to social media, so for now I’m happy with the results.
